# SCITT API Interoperability Client

This repository contains the source code for the SCITT API interoperability client and sample emulator.

It is meant to allow experimenting with [SCITT](https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/scitt/about/) APIs and formats and proving interoperability of implementations.

Note the SCITT standards are not yet fully published and are subject to change. This repository aims to keep up with changes to the WG output as faithfully as possible but in the event of inconsistencies between this and the IETF WG documents, the IETF documents are primary.

## Prerequisites

The emulator assumes a Linux environment with Python 3.8 or higher.
On Ubuntu, run the following to install Python:

```sh
sudo apt install python3.8 python3.8-venv
```

If you want to use conda, first install it:

- [Install Conda](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html)

You can get things setup with the following:

```sh
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate scitt
```

## Clone the Emulator

Clone the scitt-api-emulator repository and change into the scitt-api-emulator folder:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/scitt-community/scitt-api-emulator.git
```

or for ssh:

```sh
git clone git@github.com:scitt-community/scitt-api-emulator.git
```

then:

```sh
cd scitt-api-emulator
```

## Start the Proxy Server

The proxy server supports 2 options currently:

- 'CCF' uses the emulator server to create and verify receipts using the CCF tree algorithm
- 'RKVST' uses the RKVST production SaaS server to create and verify  receipts using native Merkle trees

Note the emulated is for experimentation only and not recommended for production use.

### Start a Fake Emulated SCITT Service

```sh
./scitt-emulator.sh server --workspace workspace/ --tree-alg CCF
```

### Start an RKVST SCITT Proxy Service

```sh
./scitt-emulator.sh server --workspace workspace/ --tree-alg RKVST
```

The default port is 8000 but can be changed with the `--port` argument.

Now the server is running at http://localhost:8000/ and uses `workspace/` to store the service parameters and service state.

The service has the following REST API:

- `POST /entries` - submit a COSE_Sign1 claim to the emulator and return an entry id
- `GET /entries/<entry_id>` - retrieve the COSE_Sign1 claim for the corresponding entry id
- `GET /entries/<entry_id>/receipt` - retrieve the SCITT receipt for corresponding entry id

The following steps should be done from a different terminal, leaving the service running in the background.

### Create Claims

```sh
./scitt-emulator.sh client create-claim --issuer did:web:example.com --content-type application/json --payload '{"sun": "yellow"}' --out claim.cose
```

Note: The emulator does not verify claim signatures and generates an ad-hoc key pair to sign the claim.

### Submit Claims and Retrieve Receipts

```sh
./scitt-emulator.sh client submit-claim --claim claim.cose --out claim.receipt.cbor
```

The `submit-claim` command uses the default service URL `http://127.0.0.1:8000` which can be changed with the `--url` argument. It can be used with the built-in server or an external service implementation.

This command sends the following two requests:

1. `POST /entries` with the claim file as HTTP body. The response is JSON containing `"entry_id"`.
2. `GET /entries/<entry_id>/receipt` to retrieve the SCITT receipt.

### Retrieve Claims

```sh
./scitt-emulator.sh client retrieve-claim --entry-id 123 --out claim.cose
```

The `retrieve-claim` command uses the default service URL `http://127.0.0.1:8000` which can be changed with the `--url` argument. It can be used with the built-in server or an external service implementation.

This command sends the following request:

- `GET /entries/<entry_id>` to retrieve the claim.

### Retrieve Receipts

```sh
./scitt-emulator.sh client retrieve-receipt --entry-id 123 --out receipt.cbor
```

The `retrieve-receipt` command uses the default service URL `http://127.0.0.1:8000` which can be changed with the `--url` argument. It can be used with the built-in server or an external service implementation.

This command sends the following request:

- `GET /entries/<entry_id>/receipt` to retrieve the receipt.

### Validate Receipts

```sh
./scitt-emulator.sh client verify-receipt --claim claim.cose --receipt claim.receipt.cbor --service-parameters workspace/service_parameters.json
```

The `verify-receipt` command verifies a SCITT receipt given a SCITT claim and a service parameters file. This command can be used to verify receipts generated by other implementations.

The `service_parameters.json` file gets created when starting a service using `./scitt-emulator.sh server`. The format of this file is not standardized and is currently:

```json
{
    "serviceId": "emulator",
    "treeAlgorithm": "CCF",
    "signatureAlgorithm": "ES256",
    "insertPolicy": "*",
    "serviceCertificate": "-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----..."
}
```

`"signatureAlgorithm"` and `"serviceCertificate"` are additional parameters specific to the [`CCF` tree algorithm](https://ietf-scitt.github.io/draft-birkholz-scitt-receipts/draft-birkholz-scitt-receipts.html#name-additional-parameters).

### COSE and CBOR Debugging

The following websites can be used to inspect COSE and CBOR files:

- https://gluecose.github.io/cose-viewer/
- https://cbor.me/

## Code Structure

`scitt_emulator/scitt.py` contains the core SCITT algorithms that are agnostic of a specific tree algorithm.

`scitt_emulator/ccf.py` is the implementation of the [CCF tree algorithm](https://ietf-scitt.github.io/draft-birkholz-scitt-receipts/draft-birkholz-scitt-receipts.html#name-ccf-tree-algorithm). For each claim, a receipt is generated using a fake but valid Merkle tree that is independent of other submitted claims. A real CCF service would maintain a single Merkle tree covering all submitted claims and auxiliary entries.

`scitt_emulator/rkvst.py` is a simple REST proxy that takes SCITT standard API calls and routes them through to the [RKVST production SaaS service](https://app.rkvst.io). Each claim is stored in a Merkle tree underpinning a Quorum blockchain and  receipts contain valid, verifiable inclusion proofs for the claim in that Merkle proof. [More docs on receipts here](https://docs.rkvst.com/platform/overview/scitt-receipts/).

`scitt_emulator/server.py` is a simple Flask server that acts as a SCITT transparency service.

`scitt_emulator/client.py` is a CLI that supports creating claims, submitting claims to and retrieving receipts from the server, and verifying receipts.

In order to add a new tree algorithm, a file like `scitt_emulator/ccf.py` must be created and the containing class be added in `scitt_emulator/tree_algs.py`.

## Run Tests

```bash
./run-tests.sh
```

## Contributing

This project welcomes contributions and suggestions. Please see the [Contribution guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md).
