docs/registration_policies.md, before:

# Registration Policies

- References
  - [5.2.2. Registration Policies](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-birkholz-scitt-architecture-02.html#name-registration-policies)

## Simple decoupled file based policy engine

The SCITT API emulator can deny entry based on presence of
`operation.policy.{insert,denied,failed}` files. Currently only for use with
`use_lro=True`.

This is a simple way to enable evaluation of claims prior to submission by
arbitrary policy engines which watch the workspace (fanotify, inotify, etc.).

[![asciicast-of-simple-decoupled-file-based-policy-engine](https://asciinema.org/a/620587.svg)](https://asciinema.org/a/620587)

Start the server

```console
$ rm -rf workspace/
$ mkdir -p workspace/storage/operations
$ timeout 1s scitt-emulator server --workspace workspace/ --tree-alg CCF --use-lro
Service parameters: workspace/service_parameters.json
^C
```

Modification of config to non-`*` insert policy. Restart SCITT API emulator server after this.

```console
$ echo "$(cat workspace/service_parameters.json)" \
    | jq '.insertPolicy = "allowlist.schema.json"' \
    | tee workspace/service_parameters.json.new \
    && mv workspace/service_parameters.json.new workspace/service_parameters.json
{
  "serviceId": "emulator",
  "treeAlgorithm": "CCF",
  "signatureAlgorithm": "ES256",
  "serviceCertificate": "-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----",
  "insertPolicy": "allowlist.schema.json"
}
```

Basic policy engine in two files

**enforce_policy.py**

```python
import os
import sys
import pathlib

policy_reason = ""
if "POLICY_REASON_PATH" in os.environ:
    policy_reason = pathlib.Path(os.environ["POLICY_REASON_PATH"]).read_text()

cose_path = pathlib.Path(sys.argv[-1])
policy_action_path = cose_path.with_suffix(".policy." + os.environ["POLICY_ACTION"].lower())
policy_action_path.write_text(policy_reason)
```

Simple drop rule based on claim content allowlist.

**allowlist.schema.json**

```json
{
    "$id": "https://schema.example.com/scitt-allowlist.schema.json",
    "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
    "properties": {
        "issuer": {
            "type": "string",
            "enum": [
                "did:web:example.org"
            ]
        }
    }
}
```

**jsonschema_validator.py**

```python
import os
import sys
import json
import pathlib
import unittest

import cwt
import pycose
from pycose.messages import Sign1Message
from jsonschema import validate, ValidationError

from scitt_emulator.scitt import ClaimInvalidError, CWTClaims
from scitt_emulator.verify_statement import verify_statement
from scitt_emulator.key_helpers import verification_key_to_object


def main():
    claim = sys.stdin.buffer.read()

    msg = Sign1Message.decode(claim, tag=True)

    if pycose.headers.ContentType not in msg.phdr:
        raise ClaimInvalidError("Claim does not have a content type header parameter")
    if not msg.phdr[pycose.headers.ContentType].startswith("application/json"):
        raise TypeError(
            f"Claim content type does not start with application/json: {msg.phdr[pycose.headers.ContentType]!r}"
        )

    verification_key = verify_statement(msg)
    unittest.TestCase().assertTrue(
        verification_key,
        "Failed to verify signature on statement",
    )

    cwt_protected = cwt.decode(msg.phdr[CWTClaims], verification_key.cwt)
    issuer = cwt_protected[1]
    subject = cwt_protected[2]

    issuer_key_as_object = verification_key_to_object(verification_key)
    unittest.TestCase().assertTrue(
        issuer_key_as_object,
        "Failed to convert issuer key to JSON schema verifiable object",
    )

    SCHEMA = json.loads(pathlib.Path(os.environ["SCHEMA_PATH"]).read_text())

    try:
        validate(
            instance={
                "$schema": "https://schema.example.com/scitt-policy-engine-jsonschema.schema.json",
                "issuer": issuer,
                "issuer_key": issuer_key_as_object,
                "subject": subject,
                "claim": json.loads(msg.payload.decode()),
            },
            schema=SCHEMA,
        )
    except ValidationError as error:
        print(str(error), file=sys.stderr)
        sys.exit(1)


if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

We'll create a small wrapper to serve in place of a more fully featured policy
engine.

**policy_engine.sh**

```bash
export SCHEMA_PATH="${1}"
CLAIM_PATH="${2}"

echo ${CLAIM_PATH}

(python3 jsonschema_validator.py < ${CLAIM_PATH} 2>error && POLICY_ACTION=insert python3 enforce_policy.py ${CLAIM_PATH}) || (python3 -c 'import sys, json; print(json.dumps({"type": "denied", "detail": sys.stdin.read()}))' < error > reason.json; POLICY_ACTION=denied POLICY_REASON_PATH=reason.json python3 enforce_policy.py ${CLAIM_PATH})
```

Example running allowlist check and enforcement.

```console
$ npm install nodemon && \
  node_modules/.bin/nodemon -e .cose --exec 'find workspace/storage/operations -name \*.cose -exec nohup sh -xe policy_engine.sh $(cat workspace/service_parameters.json | jq -r .insertPolicy) {} \;'
```

Also ensure you restart the server with the new config we edited.

```console
$ scitt-emulator server --workspace workspace/ --tree-alg CCF --use-lro
```

The current emulator notary (create-statement) implementation will sign
statements using a generated ephemeral key or a key we provide via the
`--private-key-pem` argument.

Since we need to export the key for verification by the policy engine, we will
first generate it using `ssh-keygen`.

```console
$ export ISSUER_PORT="9000" \
  && export ISSUER_URL="http://localhost:${ISSUER_PORT}" \
  && ssh-keygen -q -f /dev/stdout -t ecdsa -b 384 -N '' -I $RANDOM <<<y 2>/dev/null | python -c 'import sys; from cryptography.hazmat.primitives import serialization; print(serialization.load_ssh_private_key(sys.stdin.buffer.read(), password=None).private_bytes(encoding=serialization.Encoding.PEM, format=serialization.PrivateFormat.PKCS8, encryption_algorithm=serialization.NoEncryption()).decode().rstrip())' > private-key.pem \
  && scitt-emulator client create-claim \
    --private-key-pem private-key.pem \
    --issuer "${ISSUER_URL}" \
    --subject "solar" \
    --content-type application/json \
    --payload '{"sun": "yellow"}' \
    --out claim.cose
```

The core of policy engine we implemented in `jsonschema_validator.py` will
verify the COSE message generated using the public portion of the notary's key.
We've implemented two possible styles of key resolution. Both of them require
resolution of public keys via an HTTP server.

Let's start the HTTP server now, we'll populate the needed files in the
sections corresponding to each resolution style.

```console
$ python -m http.server "${ISSUER_PORT}" &
$ python_http_server_pid=$!
```

### SSH `authorized_keys` style notary public key resolution

Keys are discovered via making an HTTP GET request to the URL given by the
`issuer` parameter via the `web` DID method and de-serializing the SSH
public keys found within the response body.

GitHub exports a users authentication keys at https://github.com/username.keys
Leveraging this URL as an issuer `did:web:github.com:username.keys` with the
following pattern would enable a GitHub user to act as a SCITT notary.

Start an HTTP server with an SSH public key served at the root.

```console
$ cat private-key.pem | ssh-keygen -f /dev/stdin -y | tee index.html
```

### OpenID Connect token style notary public key resolution

Keys are discovered two part resolution of HTTP paths relative to the issuer

`/.well-known/openid-configuration` path is requested via HTTP GET. The
response body is parsed as JSON and the value of the `jwks_uri` key is
requested via HTTP GET.

`/.well-known/jwks` (is typically the value of `jwks_uri`) path is requested
via HTTP GET. The response body is parsed as JSON. Public keys are loaded
from the value of the `keys` key which stores an array of JSON Web Key (JWK)
style serializations.

```console
$ mkdir -p .well-known/
$ cat > .well-known/openid-configuration <<EOF
{
    "issuer": "${ISSUER_URL}",
    "jwks_uri": "${ISSUER_URL}/.well-known/jwks",
    "response_types_supported": ["id_token"],
    "claims_supported": ["sub", "aud", "exp", "iat", "iss"],
    "id_token_signing_alg_values_supported": ["ES384"],
    "scopes_supported": ["openid"]
}
EOF
$ cat private-key.pem | python -c 'import sys, json, jwcrypto.jwt; key = jwcrypto.jwt.JWK(); key.import_from_pem(sys.stdin.buffer.read()); print(json.dumps({"keys":[{**key.export_public(as_dict=True),"use": "sig","kid": key.thumbprint()}]}, indent=4, sort_keys=True))' | tee .well-known/jwks
{
    "keys": [
        {
            "crv": "P-384",
            "kid": "y96luxaBaw6FeWVEMti_iqLWPSYk8cKLzZG8X45PA2k",
            "kty": "EC",
            "use": "sig",
            "x": "ZQazDzYmcMHF5Dstkbw7SwWvR_oXQHFS-TLppri-0xDby8TmCpzHyr6TH03CLBxj",
            "y": "lsIbRskEv06Rf0vttkB3vpXdZ-a50ck74MVyRwOvN55P4s8usQAm3PY1KnAgWtHF"
        }
    ]
}
```

Attempt to submit the statement we created. You should see that due to our
current `allowlist.schema.json` the Transparency Service denied the insertion
of the statement into the log.

```console
$ scitt-emulator client submit-claim --claim claim.cose --out claim.receipt.cbor
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/home/alice/.local/bin/scitt-emulator", line 33, in <module>
    sys.exit(load_entry_point('scitt-emulator', 'console_scripts', 'scitt-emulator')())
  File "/home/alice/Documents/python/scitt-api-emulator/scitt_emulator/cli.py", line 22, in main
    args.func(args)
  File "/home/alice/Documents/python/scitt-api-emulator/scitt_emulator/client.py", line 196, in <lambda>
    func=lambda args: submit_claim(
  File "/home/alice/Documents/python/scitt-api-emulator/scitt_emulator/client.py", line 107, in submit_claim
    raise_for_operation_status(operation)
  File "/home/alice/Documents/python/scitt-api-emulator/scitt_emulator/client.py", line 43, in raise_for_operation_status
    raise ClaimOperationError(operation)
scitt_emulator.client.ClaimOperationError: Operation error denied: 'did:web:example.com' is not one of ['did:web:example.org']

Failed validating 'enum' in schema['properties']['issuer']:
    {'enum': ['did:web:example.org'], 'type': 'string'}

On instance['issuer']:
    'did:web:example.com'
```

Modify the allowlist to ensure that our issuer, aka our local HTTP server with
our keys, is set to be the allowed issuer.

```console
$ export allowlist="$(cat allowlist.schema.json)" && \
    jq '.properties.issuer.enum[0] = env.ISSUER_URL' <(echo "${allowlist}") \
    | tee allowlist.schema.json
```

Submit the statement from the issuer we just added to the allowlist.

```console
$ scitt-emulator client submit-claim --claim claim.cose --out claim.receipt.cbor
Claim registered with entry ID 1
Receipt written to claim.receipt.cbor
```

Stop the server that serves the public keys

```console
$ kill $python_http_server_pid
```

Commit message:

key loader: did: web: SCITT SCRAPI transparency-configuration
Signed-off-by: John Andersen <johnandersenpdx@gmail.com>

docs/registration_policies.md, after:

# Registration Policies

- References
  - [5.2.2. Registration Policies](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-birkholz-scitt-architecture-02.html#name-registration-policies)

## Simple decoupled file based policy engine

The SCITT API emulator can deny entry based on presence of
`operation.policy.{insert,denied,failed}` files. Currently only for use with
`use_lro=True`.

This is a simple way to enable evaluation of claims prior to submission by
arbitrary policy engines which watch the workspace (fanotify, inotify, etc.).

[![asciicast-of-simple-decoupled-file-based-policy-engine](https://asciinema.org/a/620587.svg)](https://asciinema.org/a/620587)

Start the server

```console
$ rm -rf workspace/
$ mkdir -p workspace/storage/operations
$ timeout 1s scitt-emulator server --workspace workspace/ --tree-alg CCF --use-lro
Service parameters: workspace/service_parameters.json
^C
```

Modification of config to non-`*` insert policy. Restart SCITT API emulator server after this.

```console
$ echo "$(cat workspace/service_parameters.json)" \
    | jq '.insertPolicy = "allowlist.schema.json"' \
    | tee workspace/service_parameters.json.new \
    && mv workspace/service_parameters.json.new workspace/service_parameters.json
{
  "serviceId": "emulator",
  "treeAlgorithm": "CCF",
  "signatureAlgorithm": "ES256",
  "serviceCertificate": "-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----",
  "insertPolicy": "allowlist.schema.json"
}
```

Basic policy engine in two files

**enforce_policy.py**

```python
import os
import sys
import pathlib

policy_reason = ""
if "POLICY_REASON_PATH" in os.environ:
    policy_reason = pathlib.Path(os.environ["POLICY_REASON_PATH"]).read_text()

cose_path = pathlib.Path(sys.argv[-1])
policy_action_path = cose_path.with_suffix(".policy." + os.environ["POLICY_ACTION"].lower())
policy_action_path.write_text(policy_reason)
```

Simple drop rule based on claim content allowlist.

**allowlist.schema.json**

```json
{
    "$id": "https://schema.example.com/scitt-allowlist.schema.json",
    "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
    "properties": {
        "issuer": {
            "type": "string",
            "enum": [
                "did:web:example.org"
            ]
        }
    }
}
```

**jsonschema_validator.py**

```python
import os
import sys
import json
import pathlib
import unittest

import cwt
import pycose
from pycose.messages import Sign1Message
from jsonschema import validate, ValidationError

from scitt_emulator.scitt import ClaimInvalidError, CWTClaims
from scitt_emulator.verify_statement import verify_statement
from scitt_emulator.key_helpers import verification_key_to_object


def main():
    claim = sys.stdin.buffer.read()

    msg = Sign1Message.decode(claim, tag=True)

    if pycose.headers.ContentType not in msg.phdr:
        raise ClaimInvalidError("Claim does not have a content type header parameter")
    if not msg.phdr[pycose.headers.ContentType].startswith("application/json"):
        raise TypeError(
            f"Claim content type does not start with application/json: {msg.phdr[pycose.headers.ContentType]!r}"
        )

    verification_key = verify_statement(msg)
    unittest.TestCase().assertTrue(
        verification_key,
        "Failed to verify signature on statement",
    )

    cwt_protected = cwt.decode(msg.phdr[CWTClaims], verification_key.cwt)
    issuer = cwt_protected[1]
    subject = cwt_protected[2]

    issuer_key_as_object = verification_key_to_object(verification_key)
    unittest.TestCase().assertTrue(
        issuer_key_as_object,
        "Failed to convert issuer key to JSON schema verifiable object",
    )

    SCHEMA = json.loads(pathlib.Path(os.environ["SCHEMA_PATH"]).read_text())

    try:
        validate(
            instance={
                "$schema": "https://schema.example.com/scitt-policy-engine-jsonschema.schema.json",
                "issuer": issuer,
                "issuer_key": issuer_key_as_object,
                "subject": subject,
                "claim": json.loads(msg.payload.decode()),
            },
            schema=SCHEMA,
        )
    except ValidationError as error:
        print(str(error), file=sys.stderr)
        sys.exit(1)


if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

We'll create a small wrapper to serve in place of a more fully featured policy
engine.

**policy_engine.sh**

```bash
export SCHEMA_PATH="${1}"
CLAIM_PATH="${2}"

echo ${CLAIM_PATH}

(python3 jsonschema_validator.py < ${CLAIM_PATH} 2>error && POLICY_ACTION=insert python3 enforce_policy.py ${CLAIM_PATH}) || (python3 -c 'import sys, json; print(json.dumps({"type": "denied", "detail": sys.stdin.read()}))' < error > reason.json; POLICY_ACTION=denied POLICY_REASON_PATH=reason.json python3 enforce_policy.py ${CLAIM_PATH})
```

Example running allowlist check and enforcement.

```console
$ npm install nodemon && \
  DID_WEB_ASSUME_SCHEME=http node_modules/.bin/nodemon -e .cose --exec 'find workspace/storage/operations -name \*.cose -exec nohup sh -xe policy_engine.sh $(cat workspace/service_parameters.json | jq -r .insertPolicy) {} \;'
```

Also ensure you restart the server with the new config we edited.

```console
$ scitt-emulator server --workspace workspace/ --tree-alg CCF --use-lro
```

The current emulator notary (create-statement) implementation will sign
statements using a generated ephemeral key or a key we provide via the
`--private-key-pem` argument.

Since we need to export the key for verification by the policy engine, we will
first generate it using `ssh-keygen`.

```console
$ export ISSUER_PORT="9000" \
  && export ISSUER_URL="http://localhost:${ISSUER_PORT}" \
  && ssh-keygen -q -f /dev/stdout -t ecdsa -b 384 -N '' -I $RANDOM <<<y 2>/dev/null | python -c 'import sys; from cryptography.hazmat.primitives import serialization; print(serialization.load_ssh_private_key(sys.stdin.buffer.read(), password=None).private_bytes(encoding=serialization.Encoding.PEM, format=serialization.PrivateFormat.PKCS8, encryption_algorithm=serialization.NoEncryption()).decode().rstrip())' > private-key.pem \
  && scitt-emulator client create-claim \
    --private-key-pem private-key.pem \
    --issuer "${ISSUER_URL}" \
    --subject "solar" \
    --content-type application/json \
    --payload '{"sun": "yellow"}' \
    --out claim.cose
```

The core of policy engine we implemented in `jsonschema_validator.py` will
verify the COSE message generated using the public portion of the notary's key.
We've implemented two possible styles of key resolution. Both of them require
resolution of public keys via an HTTP server.

Let's start the HTTP server now, we'll populate the needed files in the
sections corresponding to each resolution style.

```console
$ python -m http.server "${ISSUER_PORT}" &
$ python_http_server_pid=$!
```

### SSH `authorized_keys` style notary public key resolution

Keys are discovered via making an HTTP GET request to the URL given by the
`issuer` parameter via the `web` DID method and de-serializing the SSH
public keys found within the response body.

GitHub exports a users authentication keys at https://github.com/username.keys
Leveraging this URL as an issuer `did:web:github.com:username.keys` with the
following pattern would enable a GitHub user to act as a SCITT notary.

Start an HTTP server with an SSH public key served at the root.

```console
$ cat private-key.pem | ssh-keygen -f /dev/stdin -y | tee index.html
```

### OpenID Connect token style notary public key resolution

Keys are discovered two part resolution of HTTP paths relative to the issuer

`/.well-known/openid-configuration` path is requested via HTTP GET. The
response body is parsed as JSON and the value of the `jwks_uri` key is
requested via HTTP GET.

`/.well-known/jwks` (is typically the value of `jwks_uri`) path is requested
via HTTP GET. The response body is parsed as JSON. Public keys are loaded
from the value of the `keys` key which stores an array of JSON Web Key (JWK)
style serializations.

```console
$ mkdir -p .well-known/
$ cat > .well-known/openid-configuration <<EOF
{
    "issuer": "${ISSUER_URL}",
    "jwks_uri": "${ISSUER_URL}/.well-known/jwks",
    "response_types_supported": ["id_token"],
    "claims_supported": ["sub", "aud", "exp", "iat", "iss"],
    "id_token_signing_alg_values_supported": ["ES384"],
    "scopes_supported": ["openid"]
}
EOF
$ cat private-key.pem | python -c 'import sys, json, jwcrypto.jwt; key = jwcrypto.jwt.JWK(); key.import_from_pem(sys.stdin.buffer.read()); print(json.dumps({"keys":[{**key.export_public(as_dict=True),"use": "sig","kid": key.thumbprint()}]}, indent=4, sort_keys=True))' | tee .well-known/jwks
{
    "keys": [
        {
            "crv": "P-384",
            "kid": "y96luxaBaw6FeWVEMti_iqLWPSYk8cKLzZG8X45PA2k",
            "kty": "EC",
            "use": "sig",
            "x": "ZQazDzYmcMHF5Dstkbw7SwWvR_oXQHFS-TLppri-0xDby8TmCpzHyr6TH03CLBxj",
            "y": "lsIbRskEv06Rf0vttkB3vpXdZ-a50ck74MVyRwOvN55P4s8usQAm3PY1KnAgWtHF"
        }
    ]
}
```

### SCITT SRCAPI transparency configuration public key resolution

Keys are discovered via making an HTTP GET request to the URL given by the
`issuer` parameter with `/.well-known/transparency-configuration` as the path
component. Public keys found within the response body's JSON `jwks.keys` array.

- [`https://transparency.example/.well-known/transparency-configuration`](https://ietf-wg-scitt.github.io/draft-ietf-scitt-scrapi/draft-ietf-scitt-scrapi.html#name-transparency-configuration)

To use this method of resolution create the statement using the FQDN of the
SCITT SCRAPI service as the issuer. Also ensure you use it's private key to
sign.

```console
$ scitt-emulator client create-claim \
    --private-key-pem workspace/storage/service_private_key.pem \
    --issuer "http://localhost:8000" \
    --subject "solar" \
    --content-type application/json \
    --payload '{"sun": "yellow"}' \
    --out claim.cose
```

### Policy engine executing allowlist policy on denied issuer

Attempt to submit the statement we created. You should see that due to our
current `allowlist.schema.json` the Transparency Service denied the insertion
of the statement into the log.

```console
$ scitt-emulator client submit-claim --claim claim.cose --out claim.receipt.cbor
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/home/alice/.local/bin/scitt-emulator", line 33, in <module>
    sys.exit(load_entry_point('scitt-emulator', 'console_scripts', 'scitt-emulator')())
  File "/home/alice/Documents/python/scitt-api-emulator/scitt_emulator/cli.py", line 22, in main
    args.func(args)
  File "/home/alice/Documents/python/scitt-api-emulator/scitt_emulator/client.py", line 196, in <lambda>
    func=lambda args: submit_claim(
  File "/home/alice/Documents/python/scitt-api-emulator/scitt_emulator/client.py", line 107, in submit_claim
    raise_for_operation_status(operation)
  File "/home/alice/Documents/python/scitt-api-emulator/scitt_emulator/client.py", line 43, in raise_for_operation_status
    raise ClaimOperationError(operation)
scitt_emulator.client.ClaimOperationError: Operation error denied: 'did:web:example.com' is not one of ['did:web:example.org']

Failed validating 'enum' in schema['properties']['issuer']:
    {'enum': ['did:web:example.org'], 'type': 'string'}

On instance['issuer']:
    'did:web:example.com'
```

### Policy engine executing allowlist policy on allowed issuer

Modify the allowlist to ensure that our issuer, aka our local HTTP server with
our keys, is set to be the allowed issuer.

```console
$ export allowlist="$(cat allowlist.schema.json)" && \
    jq '.properties.issuer.enum = [env.ISSUER_URL, "http://localhost:8000"]' <(echo "${allowlist}") \
    | tee allowlist.schema.json
```

Submit the statement from the issuer we just added to the allowlist.

```console
$ scitt-emulator client submit-claim --claim claim.cose --out claim.receipt.cbor
Claim registered with entry ID 1
Receipt written to claim.receipt.cbor
```

Stop the server that serves the public keys

```console
$ kill $python_http_server_pid
```
